when Lake Pleasant was raised in 1992
they destroyed the old outdoor education
center that was operated by the county
and as mitigation for that the Bureau of
Reclamation constructed the desert
outdoor center it's bounded on the west
by Lake Pleasant and on the east by a
range of mountains it kind of blocks the
sounds and the lights of the city so
it's a mix of of wildlife and plants in
the Sonoran Desert
one thing current right now and outdoor
education is this notion of nature
deficit disorder and we see that a lot
most of the kids that come to visit the
desert outdoor center with their schools
are from me from the core areas of the
city and have never had really an
opportunity to to be in areas that are
remote I like the idea of the kids
getting to go out into nature and you
know the deserts got a lot of neat and
unique things that they don't even
realize are right outside their door
that's where really what we emphasize on
here is is the outdoors getting out
learning about our desert what's what's
the purpose of it what's out there I
just want you guys to spend one minute
sitting down here on the ground and just
observing and looking
there's no way in my tiny little
classroom that I could even try to
prepare some kind of experience like
this I mean they're out in nature and
they're experiencing it they're learning
because they are here
all right so would you guys think of
that is that like anything you see in
the big city no schools can have the
option of half-day full-day overnight
classes there's over 30 different nature
education programs they're based on
Arizona academic standards and the
subjects include science social studies
and physical education so science would
be like the microbiology aquatic life
class or the mammals class or the in
cold-blood which emphasizes on mostly
reptiles if you like cold rubber yeah
social studies would be archaeology
ancient ones so it really gets into the
past and people that once lived on this
land and then physical education would
be like mind boggle which is a lot of
team-building emphasis so what I have
here is a very lovely very plump the
black widow spider what we teach them
complements what they've learned all
semester you know it's so different to
see it in a book and then actually see
it in front of their face and to even be
able to use the microscope so we don't
have that kind of setup at our school so
to be able to actually see it here it's
just a fantastic experience for them oh
my gosh it just dies we learned a lot of
stuff about camping and survival skills
set your compass to number six on your
map don't try to use a compass and kind
of fish see how I kind of move my pole
to the side because I want to catch that
yellow fish right there oh he got away
they did a lot of activities to help us
understand water but it was in a fun way
good luck
go for it good job buddy after we took
the impact monster class we were doing
the map relay and the students saw they
caught a blister beetle and they were
just like giving it its own space and
they were saying we are not going to be
impact monsters we're not going to be
impact monsters and so I think taking
that back to class to the to their
community that they will learn to pick
up the trash when they left I so just
keep a fee they will learn not to be
that impact monsters it's part of a pen
right there there's a lighter and candy
wrappers why don't you guys grab all
that trash for me and let's bring it up
the hill follow me up this way I liked
how all the Rangers were really kinda
nice and they really helped us out we're
really unique because you've got four
interpretive Rangers that work here that
are experts in every field that we teach
they're all just really excited about
their jobs and about interacting with
kids and let's create some static
electricity shall we great for Halloween
costumes Mohawks and they just have that
passion and the kids just fall in love
with it and it's just great to to watch
and experience the desert outdoor Center
has three main buildings one the
administrative building that has also a
large multi-purpose room that serves as
a cafeteria and also as a reception area
during weddings and large events we have
a full commercial kitchen in four
classrooms inside there beside the
administrative offices and then we have
two dorms that has 75 people each so we
can handle about 150 overnight here dorm
rooms bunk beds and control their
thermostat and it's very clean
environment too we stay overnight in
these dormitories and you get this
awesome view at a very reasonable price
mpfi arias Ong son and if you don't
think that we can sing it let's do that
it'll help if you just sing along see
one of the really rewarding things about
working here is seeing busload of kids
arrive in the morning kind of wide-eyed
and just looking at all this you know
it's mysterious to them but then when
they get back on that bus it's kind of
like they know about the desert and they
own it and they're they have a joy about
them that's it's really fulfilling to
see that I've had the best day I'd like
to see the students engaged they are
loving every minute that they are here
we view the work we do here as a major
step toward the healing process of
getting the kids connected with nature
and curing that nature deficit disorder
we're taking that extra step to connect
with kids and help them connect with
major if they have that connection it's
there for a lifetime
you